# keggsum
A biological procedures summarization algorithm

Over time, the renowned KEGG database has grown to become one of the most comprehensive online databases for biological procedures. The majority of the data is stored in the form of pathways, which are graphs that depict the relationships between the diverse items participating in biological procedures such as genes and chemical compounds. However, the size, the complexity and the diversity of those graphs make them difficult to be explored and understood, as well as to extract a clear conclusion regarding their most important components. To this direction, in this work we present KEGGSum, a system and the corresponding algorithms enabling efficient and effective summarization of KEGG pathways. The KEGGSum system takes the KEGG Identifier (kid) of a KEGG pathway as input, connects to the KEGG database, downloads a specialized form of the pathway, and determines the most important nodes of the graph using a specific module of computations. To identify the most important nodes in the KEGG graphs, in this work, we explore multiple centrality measures that have been proposed for generic graphs showing their applicability for KEGG graphs as well. We do not stop in just identifying the most important nodes but we also link the selected nodes in order to produce a summary graph out of the initial KEGG graph. Finally, our system visualizes the generated summary enabling the understanding of the most important parts of the initial graph. We experimentally evaluate our system and we show its advantages and benefits.

KEGGSum is the accompanying algorithm to my master's thesis "KEGGSum: a biological procedures summarization algorithm" in Hellenic Open University's "Bioinformatics and Neuroinformatics MSc program.
